 Welcome to Gospel in Life.  Who is Jesus?  The Bible says He's fully God, the Creator of the universe, and at the same time, fully  human.  Lose one of those and you lose Christianity.  Join us for today's podcast where Tim Keller explores the person and promises of Jesus  Christ.  A reading from Psalm 69.  Save me, O God, for the waters have come up to my neck.  I sink in the myoree depths where there is no foothold.  I have come into the deep waters, the floods engulf me.  I am worn out calling for help.  My throat is parched.  My eyes fail looking for my God.  Those who hate me without reason outnumber the hairs of my head.  Many are my enemies without cause.  Those who seek to destroy me.  I am forced to restore what I did not steal.  You know my folly, O God.  My guilt is not hidden from you.  May those who open you not be disgraced because of me, O Lord, the Lord Almighty.  May those who seek you not be put to shame because of me, O God of Israel.  For I endure scorn for your sake and shame covers my face.  I am a stranger to my brothers and alien to my own mother's sons, for zeal for your  house consumes me and the insults of those who insult you fall on me.  When I weep and fast, I must endure scorn.  When I put on sackcloth, people make sport of me.  Those who sit at the gate mock me and I am the song of the drunkards.  But I pray to you, O Lord, in the time of your favor, in your great love, O God, answer  me with your sure salvation.  Rescue me from the mire.  Do not let me sink.  Deliver me from those who hate me from the deep waters.  Do not let the floodwaters engulf me or the depths swallow me up or the pit close its  mouth over me.  Answer me, O Lord, out of the goodness of your love in your great mercy turned to me.  Do not hide your face from your servant.  Answer me quickly for I am in trouble.  Come near and rescue me.  Redeem me because of my foes.  You know how I am scorned, disgraced and shamed.  All my enemies are before you.  God has broken my heart and has left me helpless.  I looked for sympathy, but there was none, for comfortors, but I found none.  They put gall in my food and gave me vinegar for my thirst.  May the table set before them become a snare.  May it become retribution and a trap.  May their eyes be darkened so they cannot see and their backs be bent forever.  Pour out your wrath on them, let your fierce anger overtake them.  May their place be deserted, let there be no one to dwell in their tents.  For they persecute those you wound and talk about the pain of those you hurt.  Charge them with crime upon crime.  Do not let them share in your salvation.  May they be blotted out of the book of life and not be listed with the righteous.  I am in pain and distress.  May your salvation, O God, protect me.  I will praise God's name in song and glorify him with thanksgiving.  This will please the Lord more than an ox, more than a bull with its horns and hoofs.  The poor will see and be glad, you who seek God may your hearts live.  The Lord hears the needy and does not despise his captive people.  Let heaven and earth praise him, the seas and all that move in them, for God will save Zion  and rebuild the cities of Judah.  Then people will settle there and possess it.  The children of his servants will inherit it and those who love his name will dwell there.  This is God's Word.  Now, as we approach Christmas, if you come to a church, you are going to hear people  asking the question, why did Jesus come and reflect on it?  Why did Jesus come?  Now, we have been looking at the Psalms of the Old Testament all fall.  My question, of course, to you would be, why would we look one more time at the Psalms  to find out anything about Jesus?  This Psalm that we just read, Psalm 69, is quoted by Jesus in an interesting and remarkable  way.  In John chapter 15, he is discussing with his disciples the fact that people are opposed  to him and the fact that there is so much hostility to him.  And then he says, in verse 25 of John chapter 15, he says, this is to fulfill what the  scripture said about me.  When it said they have hated me without cause, and he quotes Psalm 69, what's going on?  Here's what's going on.  Jesus says Psalm 69, of course, is written by David, and it's about David, the king, and  his immediate problems and the people that hate him.  But it actually does not have a single horizon, it's got two horizons, it doesn't have just  one reference, it's got two reference.  It not only refers to David and his problems, but it refers to one who is greater than  David, a greater warrior, a greater king, and far greater suffering, it's talking about  me.  What we mean is that not every single part of this Psalm, but what we understand is that Jesus  read this Psalm and read it and read it and identified with it and understood the language  of this Psalm to actually describe what he was going to go through.  If you've ever had a friend who's going through tremendous suffering, imagine you know a  friend going through tremendous suffering, and you come across her diary, would you read  it?  You know, you treated his sacred, wouldn't you?  You wonder, maybe you shouldn't even pick it up, but if you did pick it up, you treat  it with great reverence.  Well, that's what you've got here.  You've got the prayer diary of the Son of God and an expression in the first person of  his anguish and his sufferings for us.  Now, what we learned from it is much, but we only have time today, as we prepare to go  to the Lord's table, to look at three things that we learned from the Psalm, from his prayer  diary, about what he came to do.  He came, first of all, to be a servant, second of all, to be hated and thirdly to be exchanged,  to be a servant, to be hated to be exchanged.  The first point is the longest, the second point is the shortest, the third point is the  most important.  First of all, he came to be a servant.  You know, you notice in verse 17, he says, why have you hidden your face from your servant?  And in the very beginning of the paragraph, or the very beginning of the Psalm, he says,  I sink.  Save me, O Lord, for the waters have come up to my neck.  I sink into my red depths where there is no foothold.  What did Jesus come to do?  He came to sink, that's the first point.  He came to sink.  He came to be a servant.  That's what a servant does, a servant sinks.  We read Philippians 2 earlier in the service.  It's all about exactly what it means for Jesus to come as a servant and to sink.  There's a new book out now that's very popular written by a pastor called Descending  Indigrateness, based on Philippians 2.  Years ago, another pastor, a famous pastor named Donald Green Barnhouse used to start his  sermons this way.  The way up is down.  The way to go down is to go up.  And what justifies that language is this, this very thing.  Philippians 2, Psalm 69, the Bible says, Jesus Christ came to sink because that's what  servants do.  When you look at Philippians 2, you see it.  Jesus actually took two huge steps down.  That's what it means to be a servant, to go down.  He goes, we're told, from heaven to earth.  It says, though he was equal with God, he didn't hold on to that equality, but was found  in the form of a servant, he became a human being.  And you know, when you think of the incarnation, God becoming incarnate, in the flesh, God  becoming human being, you've got to get out of your mind.  The Christmas cards with little sweet baby Jesus asleep on the hay, it looks like an ivory  soap commercial.  I know you have to understand and you do understand it when you read Psalm 69.  You have to understand the violence of the incarnation.  The incarnation was an act of violence against Jesus.  Something he willingly took.  Violence.  Think for a moment with me.  What is so violent about prison?  What is so dehumanizing and terrible about going to prison?  You stripped of your freedom.  You stripped of your personal possessions.  What was so horrifying about that event some years ago?  I think it was in the New York area, wasn't it?  Where a man, because he was angry at a young woman who was a lovely model, had her face carved  up, was not in the New York area, also horrifying of that.  Here's someone with great beauty, stripped of her beauty.  Let me tell you, the incarnation was the greatest stripping that's ever happened.  Here is the fairest among 10,000.  Here is the beautiful son of God, and his beauty is ripped out of him and he's cast into  this figure.  And his wealth is ripped out of him and he's cast into poverty.  And the love he had with the Father is ripped out of him and he's cast into loneliness.  And the joy he had is ripped out of him and he's cast into grief and the power is ripped  out of him and he's cast into weakness.  You understand the violence of the incarnation?  God becomes human.  What does that mean?  He became a cell at one point.  You know, we confess it every time we say he was conceived by the Holy Spirit.  God became the weakest form of life in the universe.  It was vulnerable form, a cell.  Then he became a baby.  His hands on nippeted hands, you see, now flailing away impotently.  The omnipotent Lord of the universe has to be changed when he soils himself.  He can't change himself.  The violence of the incarnation, he sank.  He came to sink.  And he didn't just—Philippines II doesn't just tell us there's one step down.  He took two steps.  He didn't just come from heaven to earth.  But once he got here, he went from the cradle to the cross.  His role, his job here on earth, was not to become the head of a great political party  and sweep into power.  His job was to be tortured and to be killed.  The one who knit us together in our mother's womb was deconstructed on the cross and he was  torn limb from limb.  He sunk.  You know, Jesus Christ is the most blatant and the most blunt and the greatest contradiction  to the world's understanding of greatness that there is.  The world's understanding is promote yourself, advance your cause at the expense of other  people.  A crew, the wealth and power.  Look out for number one.  And Jesus, ascended by descending the way up, he taught us is the way down.  The way to power, he taught us is to serve.  The way to rule is to submit.  The way to lose your life, to find your life is to lose your life.  The way to find your happiness is not to seek your happiness, but to seek the happiness  of others.  And you know what a Christian is?  A Christian is somebody who, in absolute contradiction to all the world's wisdom, decides  to follow that as the pattern for your own life.  Before we move on, I just want you to think about that for a second.  If you're a Christian and a servant, of course, is not greater than his master, then you're  a servant of the great servant, obviously, it means that you have also decided the way  up for me is down.  Have you decided that?  Have you decided that the essence of my life is to sink?  Let me just give you a couple of examples of what it means to be a Christian.  For example, the very first step, the very first action a Christian takes as a Christian.  In other words, conversion itself.  The very first thing you can do to even become a Christian is you rise up to God by going  down in repentance.  You will not go up unless you go down.  Well, let me put it as stark as possible.  I know there's some of you here.  I know who would like to say, yes, I make mistakes, I'm not perfect, but can you say to  other people and to God that I am a helpless sinner, that I should be cast off, that I'm  acting, even though I've been created by God, I act as if on my own creator, and even  though God is my king, I act as if on my own king, I deserve to be cut off.  I am a helpless sinner, I need a savior and a new master.  Can you say that?  Now, this is New York City, I know there's people out there who think that that is a  most primitive thing, the most primitive kind of religion.  How regressive you say, of course it's regressive, it's a step down.  And if you feel that that's too primitive, and if you couldn't say that, then you're  not a servant yet, and your intellectual pride is keeping you from going down and therefore  from coming up.  I'm going to give you another example, to be a Christian, you go down to repentance constantly.  To be a Christian also, you go down in your living standards, let me get real practical  about this.  The Bible says, look at Jesus, though he was rich, he became poor, that through his poverty  might become rich.  The Bible continually says that a Christian is someone who looks out there at all kinds  of needs, you see needy people, you see all sorts of important causes, you see the work  of a church, you see ministries that are helping people in word indeed, and before you become  a Christian, before you understand this principle, before this spirit of servitude, this mind  that was in Christ Jesus passes into you, you only give what you can afford.  Now you know how you define the word afford?  What you mean is, I can only give, as long as my giving does not lower the actual standards  of living in my life, in other words, I can give as long as it doesn't make me go down,  as long as it doesn't actually have an impact on where I can go this summer, as long  as it doesn't have an impact on how many options I have to go out to eat tonight, as  long as it doesn't change my living standard.  But that's not what Jesus did, Jesus living standards were changed fairly drastically.  And when you become a Christian, you realize that you have to give sacrificial, which means,  oh, let me put it this way, do you give your money away to people and to causes so generously  that your living standard is going down?  If not, you're not a servant yet, and your love of comfort is keeping you from going down  and therefore rising up.  You may know the story of the prodigal son, but it's not just about a wayward younger  brother.  In fact, Jesus tells this story to speak both to those who run from God and to those who  try to earn his love by being good.  In his book The prodigal God, Tim Keller shows how this well-known story reveals the heart  of the gospel, a message of hope for both the rebellious younger brother and the judgmental  older brother, and an invitation for all to experience God's prodigal, extravagant grace.  Whether you're a Christian or you're still exploring faith, the prodigal God will help  you see your relationship with Christ in a whole new way.  The prodigal God is our thank you for your gift this month to help gospel and life share  the hope and joy of Christ's gracious and relentless love with people all over the world.  That's your copy today at gospelandlife.comslashgive that's gospelandlife.comslashgive.  Now, here's Dr. Keller with the rest of today's teaching.  Let me give you one more example.  If Philippians 2 were told he made himself of no reputation, a person before you become  a Christian, before the spirit of servanthood, before you understand the principle of the way  down is up, the way up is to go down.  And help people, as long as you get thanks, as long as you get affirmation, as long as  you get some recognition, as long as you get some paths on the back, fine.  This is how you tell the difference between a person who is serving out of selfishness  and a real servant who's not in it for a payoff.  You make yourself of no reputation.  You're not in it for the thanks you get, only put it to this way.  You need a lot of thanks, do you need, are you always having your nose been out of shape  because you feel taken for granted and you feel that people aren't recognizing what  you're putting in and nobody seems to know how hard you work.  I work my fingers to the bone around this church and what thanks do I get.  If that's how you feel, you're not a servant yet and your need for approval is keeping  you from moving down so that you can come up.  You see, what God says is, lose your money and I'll give you another kind of riches.  Lose your recognition and I'll give you another kind of honor.  Lose your obsession with staying in control and I'll give you another kind of security.  Lose your life and you'll find it.  He came to sink and Christians are people who know that the way down is up and the way  to go up is to go down.  Secondly, he came to be hated.  Now, remember, as I mentioned to you, he quotes in the New Testament, he quotes this verse.  He doesn't quote the first couple of verses though.  It's obvious that he's looking at all of this and he's thinking of himself.  This is his language, this is his heart, but he quotes verse 4 where it says, those  who hate me without reason out in number the hairs of my head, many of the enemies without  cause.  I'm going to be real brief on this when I warned you, but it's very important.  Jesus in the New Testament points out the fact that people automatically will hate him  without reason.  They'll hate him irrationally because he's holy.  There is something in the human heart that is afraid of real holiness.  We know, when I was some years ago, a movie that came out casually as a war and it was  about a man who decides to tell the truth about what happened out in Vietnam, even though  it was going to jeopardize his life, even though it was going to ruin his career, even though  it was going to make have a tremendous impact on his life and he did it anyway.  And the movie reviewer here in New York Times, Vincent Canbey, points out this.  He says, such selfless moral conviction always makes a person a pariah because such purity  of spirit is totally frightening to us.  What he means is we have got in our hearts an engine of self-justification and the way  we continually convince ourselves that we're okay is that when we get near a standard of  godliness that shows up our own flaws, we either run from it or we run it down.  We either run it down or run away.  That's true of anything, anyone who's living a straight life, living a servant life.  Now when Jesus shows up, his standard is so lofty and so high that they hate him without  cause.  He has not enemies without number, but I tell you that if you and I are going to follow  Jesus and if you and I are going to be servants, that's always the mark of a servant.  A servant will always be hated without a cause.  He'll be a couple of examples.  A friend of mine who years ago was a cop, a policeman in a large city in the United States.  He became a Christian.  He had trouble with something and that is that the pimps in the precinct would come in  and give a lot of money to the sergeant who would pass it out to all the officers so that  they would not pick up the prostitutes that put money in the pool.  After my friend became a Christian, he decided he didn't want to take that money and at  one point a guy comes up to him and says, hey, you better start taking that money.  These don't like the fact that you seem to think you're more pure than the rest of us  and you better take that money or the next time you need to back up, it might come slowly.  I remember talking to a family when I was living in Philadelphia and when the very first black  family moved into their white neighborhood.  They went over as Christians, as friends took them some pies and greeted them and afterwards  they were absolutely vilified and attacked by the other white families in that neighborhood  and they said, my house is the only thing I've got.  If those people start coming in, it's going to sink down, you're going to ruin me.  How can you do this to me?  A man once came to me and said after he became a Christian, if I start to report my income  truly and start to pay the taxes, I really owe all my other co-workers are going to be  nailed by the IRS as well.  What do I do?  All I can tell you is not what these people did, but I can tell you is this, normal  servanthood, normal, moral lives will bring you hatred without cause.  Normal human living, normal moral behavior, normal Christian living is going to show up  the racism in the neighborhood, it's going to show up the dishonesty at work, it's going  to show up the gossip at the office, it's going to show up the promiscuity of the party  and you will be hated with that cause, are you or you just blend into your surroundings?  Does anybody hate you without cause?  Then you're not following Jesus because servants sink and servants are hated with that cause.  Number three, and the most important, Jesus Christ did not simply come to be a servant  and come to be hated in a sense, that's the general gist of what it means to say he came  as a servant, but he came very specifically to be exchanged.  They put it to this way, in verse nine, now David, the guy who writes this song is very perplexed.  He can't see what we can see, he can't read his own experience through Jesus.  In verse nine, he says,  Zeal for your house consumes me and the insults of those who insult you fall on me.  Now David is perplexed.  He says, like I mentioned in verse 17, he says,  How can you let your servant, how can you hide your face from your servant?  I'm doing everything right, I'm being an exemplary servant, I'm loving you, I'm true to you.  Zeal for your house, for your cause consumes me.  Why in the world are you letting me suffer innocently?  Or let me put it this way, he says, Zeal for your house consumes me.  And then he says the insults, the people insult you fall on me.  That which I do not deserve is falling on me.  How could it be, says David?  Jesus says,  That's what I came to do.  But that which I did not deserve fell on me.  Isaiah talks about the suffering servant in these terms.  He simply says in Isaiah 52 and 53,  See my servant will act wisely,  Yet it was the Lord's will to crush him and cause him to suffer.  And though the Lord makes him like his life a guilt offering,  The results of his suffering he will see and he shall be satisfied.  Listen with me for a second.  Think with me.  This is the doctrine of substitution.  Whenever I ask one of my sons to pick up something,  You know, this is a mess in here, pick it up.  If it so happened that my son was guilty of making the mess,  He will reluctantly usually get up and start doing it slowly.  But if, well, one to me,  If I ask one particular son to pick up the mess  that has actually been caused by the failures and sins of some other son.  In that situation,  The son will say, that's not my fault.  Why should I take the hit for the failing of another?  Why should I suffer in a substitutionary way  for the fault failings in the sins of someone else?  Let's pick this up.  This is an instinct.  This is exactly what your heart say.  Ah, someone says, you know,  for whatever reason,  Because of all sorts of failures,  Failures on the part of the person,  Failures on the part of his family,  Failures on the part of the system,  Failures on the part of the city,  We now have a great need for lots of drug rehabilitation centers.  We need homeless rehabilitation centers.  We need to put them in your neighborhood and what's the attitude?  What's the attitude?  Why should I take the hit for the sins of someone else?  Why should I suffer substitutionally for the failings of someone else?  That's the instinct.  That's how we always feel.  But that's not how a servant's heart operates.  Let me tell you how a servant's heart operates.  The servant says, I know this isn't my fault.  But somebody's got to take the hit.  And somebody's going to have to pay the price.  And so I will do it.  I will take the hit.  I will pay the price.  I will substitutionally suffer.  Now, do you understand why Jesus was the greatest servant of all?  Because he just didn't do a little.  He took the hit for the sins of the world.  He suffered substitutionally for the sins of everyone.  And that is what's being depicted here.  He took the biggest hit.  He took the greatest weight.  He took on himself the most incredible debt.  That's why when he reads those words, father, why have you hidden your face from your servant?  He knows the answer.  Because when he was on the cross and he was saying, why have you hidden your face from your servant?  Why?  My God have you forsaken me.  As God the Father turned away from him.  The Father said, son, you know why I have to do this to you.  Because we agreed to do this from all eternity.  No, why am I hiding my face from you?  Because it's got to fall on you.  It will all fall on you.  In your mind's eye, look at him.  And then read Psalm 69.  Look at him up there.  Blood coming down his face.  His eyes swollen shut because he's been beaten.  His back is ripped open because of the scourging.  He's suffocating up on the cross and then read.  I looked for sympathy, but there was none.  I looked for comforters and I found none.  My heart is breaking and there's nobody to bind it up.  It fell on him.  Don't you see some of you out there.  Listen, this is some of you who've done some terrible things.  But don't you see there's hope for anybody.  There may be people out here.  This is New York City.  Maybe people out here who have murdered people.  There's people out here who've done some terrible things and you hate yourselves.  And at some deep level, you're saying nothing can help me.  I deserve to be spit upon.  I deserve to be beaten.  I deserve to be condemned.  Do you see?  Do you finally see?  It fell on him.  In other words, if you believe in Jesus Christ,  you've already been beaten.  You're right, but you've already been beaten.  You're right, but you've already been spit upon.  You're right, but you've already been condemned.  And there's plenty of you that haven't done anything that awful.  And don't you see what's going on in your lives?  Look at yourselves.  Why are you working so hard?  Why are you working so desperately hard?  Why is there this franticness about your life trying to prove yourself?  Or why is there all this grumpiness and irritability about your life trying to defend yourself?  Don't you see?  Stop it!  It's been paid.  Stop trying to pay for it.  It fell on you.  Lord Jesus, say that.  It fell on you, Lord Jesus, for me.  Let's conclude this way.  Don't you see what's so wonderful about the teaching of the Bible?  Jesus Christ did not come only as God-servant.  No, he didn't come only as a model of what it means to serve God.  If that's all he was, oh, we'd be in such trouble.  We'd look at him and he'd be mad at him.  We'd run from him. We'd hate him without cause.  But instead, he sunk for me.  And you, he sunk for us.  He was hated for us.  He was exchanged for us.  He comes to actually serve and wait on us.  It says in Luke, Jesus tells this parable about himself.  And he says in the book of Luke,  blessed are those servants whose master finds them watching when he comes.  He will gird himself to serve and will come and wait on them.  Do you know what that means?  On the last day, if he finds you serving him, on the last day,  he's going to gird himself.  The gird means to pick up your robes and stick them in your belt  so that you can concentrate.  He's going to gird himself.  He's going to pull up all the infinities and immensities of his infinite  omnipotent power and he's going to bring them all to bear to serve you,  to heal you, to love you, to satisfy you, to honor you.  Blessed will those servants be.  Are you ready for that day?  If tomorrow's that day, would you be one of those servants?  Don't forget to be a real servant.  Isn't somebody who's trying to save him or herself by your service?  Because the first act of a real servant is to say,  because only love me and accept me because it fell on you.  I'm a sinner.  I can't save myself through my serving.  The first act of service is to say accept me because,  O Lord Jesus, it all fell on you.  The bread and the cup.  When you get the bread, it's going to be broken.  And as you eat it, you'll break it more.  Listen to what it says.  It says,  Do you know why I was broken?  Do you know why I was forsaken?  Do you know why my father hid his face  so it could fall on me for you?  Let's pray.  Father, we ask as we take the bread and the cup  that we might go down to come up.  We pray that we might learn what it means  that your sons die for us and suffered for us.  And the more we think about this is we take the bread and cup,  make us servants as well.  Men and women who will go down in their bank accounts,  go down in recognition, go down in the status and eyes of the world,  go down in repentance,  but who will find a new kind of honor, a new kind of riches,  a new kind of joy.  Father, as we take the bread and cup,  do all that in us.  We pray in Jesus' name, amen.  Thanks for joining us here on The Gospel and Life Podcast.  We hope that today's teaching encouraged you  to go deeper into God's Word.  You can help others discover this podcast  by rating and reviewing it  and to find more great Gospel-centered content  by Tim Keller, visit gospelandlife.com.  Today's sermon was recorded in 1993.  The sermons and talks you hear on The Gospel and Life Podcast  were recorded between 1989 and 2017,  while Dr. Keller was senior pastor  at Redeemer Presbyterian Church.